# [WIP] Instruction

As we are building NPU for edge devices, the instructions should be simple and clear. We are referring to the [OpenTPU ISA design](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2308.06767.pdf). The main purpose of this ISA design is to tiling GEMM+X(activation) process into small pieces. This will enhance the parallelism on multi-level pipeline inside the NPU execution. We inspired by [this paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1706.10086.pdf) on tiling the GEMM, and leave the fine control on tiling strategy to software. The software developers should take care of the locality of memory access and execution order.

Other than that, we found a good reference from NVIDIA, [Matrix Multiply-Accumulation Instrctions under PTX Instructions](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/parallel-thread-execution/index.html#warp-level-matrix-instructions). But unlike parallel threads, our implementation only consider a systolic array with light vector DSP so the pipeline would be simpler compared to GPGPU.


## Operands

Referring to [NVIDIA PTX instruction's design on operands](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/parallel-thread-execution/index.html#instruction-operands), we also seperate integrate datatype with operation code. 

|`DTYPE`+`DLEN`|code(L)|comment|
|:----|----:|:----|
|`op.8s`|0x0||
|`op.16s`|0x1||
|`op.32s`|0x2||
|`RESERVED`|0x3|data type reserved|
|`op.8u`|0x4||
|`op.16u`|0x5||
|`op.32u`|0x6||
|`RESERVED`|0x7|data type reserved|
|`RESERVED`|0x8|float8 is not a valid data type|
|`op.16f`|0x9||
|`op.32f`|0xA||
|`RESERVED`|0xB|data type reserved|
|`RESERVED`|0xC|bfloat8 is not a valid data type|
|`op.16bf`|0xD||
|`RESERVED`|0xE|bfloat32 is not a valid data type|
|`RESERVED`|0xF|data type reserved|

For now we are only planing to implement the `.8s` and `.8u` operations.

As NPU is a slim implementation of GPGPU, so we only consider vector/matrix data addressing. We often use 4 32-bit addressing registers to locate the data, `ax`, `bx`, `cx` and `dx` respectively. This instruction will provide the following addressing method:

1. `[reg]`: using the address register
2. `[reg+imm]`: using the address register with immediate offset
3. `[imm]`: using immediate address


## Operation
|OP|code(H)|Comment|
|:----|:----|:----|
|`nop`|0x0|No operation|
|`ld`|0x1|Read host memory. Usage: `rhm M, N, src, dst`| 
|`st`|0x2|Write host memory. Usage: `whm M, N, src, dst`|
|`mma`|0x3|Multiply-addition-accumulate, $\text{dst}=XW+B$. Usage `mac M, N, W, X, B, dst`|